Lesson #3

The Swiss Pairing System

This is a ratings-based system which attempts to allow most games in a pairing group to be played across approximately the same ratings differences. It was introduced to the USCF from Europe by George Koltanowski.

Unlike a knock-out tournament, a Swiss event does not eliminate players (who came too play chess - not to be eliminated), but instead knocks them down as they yield points via draws and losses. It is therefore a &quot;knock-down&quot; event, not a &quot;knock-out&quot; event.

A Swiss tournament can accommodate a very large number of players while not being as accurate in determining top performances as the round robin tournament. The event should be designed so as to guarantee no more than one perfect score. To this end, the number of players must not exceed 2^n (2 raised to the nth power), where n is the number of rounds.

Thus, a 40-man scholastic Swiss should be at of least 6 rounds duration. A five-round event would only accommodate 32 players. Six rounds handles 64 players. A 12-round US Open can handle 4096 players. If there are 55 players and only 5 available rounds, the event should be broken down into two smaller sections.

And if it is desired to produce clear first and second place finishers, two more rounds should be added to the event. So a 100-player event would require nine rounds if clear 1st and 2nd places are desired.  Pairings are done from the top of the event to the bottom of the event. There are three rules which apply to this process. These rules are routinely juxtaposed in commonly encountered situations. They are, in order of precedence: 1) Avoid pairing two players with each other twice. A forfeited game involving two players does not count as a game and the two may subsequently be paired again; 2) Equal scores, that is that pairings should be made within a single score group as much as possible. An adjacent score group commonly suffices; 3) Upper-half versus lower-half; 4) Equalization of colors. Try to get as many players color history either equalized or including only one extra white or black; 5) Alternation of colors.

To pair the first round, all the players in a single section are lined up in rank order by rating, from highest to lowest. This group is divided into upper and lower halves. An odd player is placed at the bottom of the lower half. Then a random process (e.g. coin toss) iis employed to assign the colors on the first board. Let's suppose that the top player was thus randomly assigned black. So a nine-player section consisting of players ALPHA through INDIA (India lowest), the first-round pairings would be:

White

Black

^ = upper half

ECHO

ALPHA^

BRAVO^

FOXTROT

GOLF

CHARLEY^

DELTA^

INDIA**

(HOTEL receives a full-point bye) INDIA jumped over HOTEL because she is unrated - an unrated player needs to play games and so no bye! Let's do round 2. Winners in round 1 were ALPHA, CHARLEY and DELTA. BRAVO and FOXTROT drew.

Now we lets pair the score groups. So we line up ALPHA, CHARLEY and DELTA. ALPHA and CHARLEY are the natural pairing, but they are both due to play white. DELTA is due to play black, and so we try bringing him up to play ALPHA.

That leaves CHARLEY to play the remaining player in the one score group. That is HOTEL (no color history) and that works out nicely and he plays white for alternation.

That leaves FOXTROT with a draw to play down into the zero score group. Highest rated player there is ECHO. The colors are perfect and FOXTROT is tentatively paired as white against ECHO.

That leaves us with GOLF, HOTEL and INDIA, One of these will get the bye, and that cannot be INDIA (unrated) or HOTEL (assuming he had a bye and not a house player in round 1). That means that HOTEL will play INDIA. INDIA needs to play white (equalization).

And so the round two pairings become:

White

Black

ALPHA (1)

DELTA (1)

CHARLEY (1)

HOTEL (1)

FOXTROT (1/2)

ECHO (0)

INDIA (0)

BRAVO (1/2)

GOLF (0) - byeAnd so our round 3 pairings are ;

are;

Black

White

DELTA (1+2)

HOTEL (1)

BRAVO (1)

ECHO (1)

HOUSE --

CHARLEY(2)

ALPHA (1 + 2) GOLF(1) FOXTROT (1) INDIA (2)

Notice how the availability of the house player smoothed things out nicely. The house player is our best choice as an opponent for an odd player.

This is a four-round event, and so we now pair the final round. The ratio of players to rounds is small, which is a red flag when doing the last round. Our flexibility is reduced. For instructional purposes, let's assume that our house player went home.

Round 3 results showed CHARLEY (3), ALPHA (2+2), BRAVO (2), ECHO (2) and the house player as winners. So we pair from the top, which means that CHARLEY (3) must be served first. He is due white for equalization as is the only remaining 2 +2, ALPHA. This pairing takes precedence over the color conflict. So the higher RANKING player receives his due color, either white or black. Player rank in a chess tournament is determined first by scThe ranking player is BRAVO (same score,\ higher rating) and so he is assigned to play black, his due color. Thus, ECHO/BRAVO.

Next up is the only 1+ 2, DELTA, due black by equalization @ 1 + 2. His choices are FOXTROT, GOLF and HOTEL @ 1. He has played none of these, and so first up for consideration is FOXTROT, due white. So tentatively FOXTROT/DELTA.

That leaves us with GOLF, HOTEL and INDIA. INDIA, due white for equalization, must be paired because an unrated cannot get the bye. HOTEL has taken a bye and may not receive another. So the last pairing is INDIA/HOTEL. GOLF receives the bye.

So the final pairings are:

White

Black

CHARLEY (3)

ALPHA (2 + 2)

ECHO (2)

BRAVO (2)

FOXTROT (1)

INDIA (2)

DELTA (1 + 2) HOTEL (1)

GOLF - bye

But there is a problem with these pairings. GOLF has also received the bye. So we must undo these pairings and find someone else to take the bye. That would be FOXTROT (1). Now, INDIA, GOLF, HOTEL and DELTA need to be sorted out. INDIA, due white, has played DELTA, but can still play HOTEL, as above. That's good because DELTA can play GOLF. DELTA needs black for equalization, and so GOLF/DELTA on. And so the posted pairings are as above with GOLF/DELTA substituted for for

FOXTROT/DELTA.ore and, if tied, by rating score first, then rating. In this case the lower rated player has the higher score, and so CHARLEY outranks ALPHA and is paired as white. So CHARLEY (3)/ALPHA (2 +1/2).

Next up are BRAVO and ECHO at two points. These players have had identical color histories and are both due black for equalization.


